# Divorce and Remarriage

## Introduction and Position

It is no secret that the idea of a marriage covenant has dwindled in the West. Many people profess "Til death do us part", but really mean "Til hardship I will stay". Christians know the idea of easy divorce is unbiblical, but it is hard to reconcile with the realities of the failed marriages they see around them. Divorce is a hard issue to grapple with, not for the case of the two young selfish lovers, but for the case of the spouse who is clinically depressed, or the barren woman, or the man who struggles with homosexual lust. It is in the pain of life that we are tempted to look at the pages of Scripture and see excepting clauses for us or for our friends, so that we can alleviate the pain of a failing marriage. But the central question is "What do the Scriptures say about when divorce is allowed?" This must be our sole guiding principal, even and especially when there are circumstances that would try to make us change our convictions.

John Macarthur helps us by giving the four possible view of divorce and remarriage: Divorce and remarriage are not allowed under any circumstances. Divorce is allowed in some circumstances but never remarriage. Divorce and remarriage are allowed in some circumstances. And finally, divorce and remarriage is permitted in all circumstances.[@macarthur_family_1982, 108] Most evangelical views tie together divorce and remarriage as one concept, so in effect a license to divorce is also a license to remarry. It can help to think of a spectrum between those who hold a "permanance view" that divorce is never allowed, to the middle view that it is only allowed in the cases of adultery or abandonment, to the other side of those who believe in an expanded rationale for divorce.

It is the opinion of this paper that divorce and remarriage are allowed, but only as a last resort, and only in the cases of abandonment or adultery. In both of these cases, the believer is on the receiving end of the divorce. Their spouse has either broken the covenant through adultery or by leaving the relationship altogether. In other words, the Christian spouse does not pursue an "out" to the relationship, they are simply reacting to what has already happened.

## Debate and Historical Discussion

It is helpful for us to define what marriage is, especially in our day of gender and sexuality confusion. John Stott states, "Marriage is an exclusive heterosexual covenant between one man and one woman, ordained and sealed by God, preceded by a public leaving of parents, consummated in sexual union, issuing in a permanent mutually supportive partnership and normally crowned by the gift of children". [@stott_marriage_1987, 8] This is a sufficient definition for our purposes. The key component for our discussion is that it is a covenant. This is something Jesus alludes to in his debate with the Pharisees in Matthew 5, Matthew 19, and Mark 10. He points to how it was "in the beginning" and states that "what God hath joined together, let not man separate". It is this concept of permanence that sits underneath marriage and bears it up. And we can see how necessary this is, because marriage is the most foundational societal institution. All families, societies, clubs, and governments sit on top of the institution of marriage. When it crumbles they all fall with it.

### The Permanence View

This leads us into the discussion of the first viewpoint, which is the Permanence view. Proponents of this believe that marriage is so binding and lasting that there is never room for divorce. Even in the extreme case of spousal abuse, they would advocate that spouses may have to physically separate for protection, but should not seek a divorce. There is some strong Scriptural tones that serve as support for this position.

In Jesus' encounter with the Pharisees in Matthew 19:6, Mark 10:9, He makes clear that God is the one who has ordained and cemented the marriage relationship.[@wingerd_divorce_2009, 16] It is not simply human, but a divine institution. He even attaches the command for man to not separate it. Notice that there are no qualifications given and so it would seem to say that there are no conditions in which marriage can be ended by man. The most extreme advocates of the permanence view would say that if someone is widowed they should remain a widow because even death does not separate the union. They also point to Paul's counsel that widows should remain as they are. Historically, this was what Papal Rome advocated and before that the church fathers, such as Athenagoras, Tertullian, and Clement of Alexandria (However, they disagreed with a second marriage after divorce and were influenced by asceticism).[@wenham_remarriage_2006, 45] Some more moderates recognize that Paul's counsel in Romans 7:1-4 shows that death does end the covenant of marriage.[@camping_what_1985, 48-49] In this circumstance, man is not tearing marriage asunder because death is an act of God.

Those who hold a permanence view also point to those same passages, which say "whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery".[@wingerd_divorce_2009, 13] If this is the case, then divorce would not have a point because if remarriage is forbidden then the only logical end of divorce would be to remain celibate for life or until a spouse has passed away.

What about the exception clause of Matthew 5:32? In this verse it states "except on the ground of sexual immorality". It would seem to go against a permanence view of there being no circumstances in which a divorce is valid. In order to answer this, we have to dive into the use of Greek terms in these passages. As is the case on much contested passages of Scripture, the debate often hinges upon the interpretation of a single word. Here it is the use of "sexual immorality" - *porneia* in the Greek.

There are three evangelical views of *porneia* In Matthew 5:32. Some believe it references adultery/immorality in general - which allows for the innocent party to remarry. Others believe it references sexual sin but that because of the rest of the verse it allows divorce, not not remarriage. The last group believe that it refers to a special category of sexual sin which they label "fornication". This would be when a couple is betrothed and one party commits a sort of sexual sin or affair which allows for the breaking of the marriage contract.[@kostenberger_god_2010, 230]

Advocates of the permanence view believe this third interpretation of *porneia* is what Jesus intends. In other words, He is not speaking of those who are married, but those who are about to be married and who are betrothed. They point to Joseph and Mary as an example of this. He was seeking to divorce her quietly because of her suspected immorality.[@wingerd_divorce_2009, 40] Additionally, the word *porneia* is used when there is another greek word *moicheia* which refers to marital adulter proper.[@hyde_christian_1981, 26-27] They argue that since Jesus is intentional about language, that he could have said it a different way but chose not to. 

We can see that often those who hold to the permanence view have a sincere desire to honor Scripture and to heed what it says, even if it runs counter-cultural to society. There is a good concern here for the distinct and important covenant of marriage. Daryl Wingerd also reminds us of the disastrous effects of divorce on families and societies. He says the extremely complex parental relationships, lower incomes, and legal obligations created by a divorce should also show us that it is not to be desired in any way, and even theologians who believe in biblical exceptions should still strongly discourage it.[@wingerd_divorce_2009, 89-92]

### The Adultery or Abandonment View

We know come to the second view, which is the most prevailing today among reformed evangelicals. This is the view that divorce and remarriage are only permissible on the ground of sexual unfaithfulness or when abandoned by a spouse.[@stott_marriage_1987, 22-23][@reformed_church_in_america_marriage_1957, 17][@dobson_what_1986, 160-161] This view rose to prominence during the period of the Reformation and Puritan era, and it is crystallized in several reformed creeds, including the Westminster Standards. The reformers were seeking to escape the erroneous and ascetic views of Papal Rome, which led to wrong practices such as priestly celibacy. It is also important to note that this view does not seek to encourage divorce in any way, but that Jesus gives the exception because he is showing the Pharisees that this is the *only* God-sanctioned reason, over against their desire to invent many ways of breaking a marriage.[@stott_marriage_1987, 16]

The Puritans were concerned with getting Scriptural views accurately, not being too lax and not being overly strict where Scripture has given freedom. They are often criticized for being legalistic killjoys, but this is an unfair criticism because it is the Puritans who brought back romantic marital love from the jaws of Rome. 

This view firstly makes an inseparable connection between marriage and divorce, arguing that you cannot place a wedge between them. In the Ancient Near East (including Babylonians, Assyrians, and Israelites) to give someone permission to divorce was implicitly permission for remarriage. The laws of all these societies reflect this assumption.[@stott_marriage_1987, 10] This seems to fit naturally with why Matthew, Mark, and Luke record Jesus saying "whoever divorces..and marries another". It also fits with adultery not having been committed until a new union is formed and (when the wife remarries) causing the spouse to commit adultery as well (Mt 19:9, Mark 10:11, Luke 16:18, Mt 5:32). This makes sense only under the assumption that divorce will lead to remarriage. [@stott_marriage_1987, 14] In fact, John MacArthur states that whenever the Scripture mentions divorce then remarriage is implied.[@macarthur_family_1982, 127-128] The Netherlands Reformed church could not find a single Reformer since 1517 that disagreed with the notion that a biblical divorce granted someone the right to remarry.[degier_marriage_1984, 10]

So where does the rationale for allowing divorce in the cases of adultery or abandonment come from? The exception for the case of adultery comes from their interpretation of Jesus own words in Matthew 5 and 19. The covenant of marriage has been broken by the offending party, which gives the innocent party the right, *but not the obligation* to remarry. This takes us back to the discussion of *porneia* because here is where the contention lies. Whereas permanence advocates say that it refers to pre-marital misconduct, the Puritans would say that this term is used in a broad sense in the NT. It refers to the expanded category of sexual misconduct both within and without marriage. So it covers both the engaged couple and the married couple. Also they would argue that it cannot simply be pointing to an engaged couple because Jesus' whole discussion with the Pharisees is talking about existing marriages.

The case of Abandonment does not come from Christ's lips, but rather from Paul in 1 Corinthians 7:10-16. He gives the apostolic instruction that if a Christian has an unbelieving spouse they are to live together unless the unbeliever strongly desires to depart. If that is the case, the believer is to let them have their way and to seek peace. It is clear in this context that Paul uses the term "being free" in the same sense for an abandoned believer as well as a widow.[@kostenberger_god_2010, 287] At first it seems strange that Paul mixes the counsel regarding widows, but this is genius because it draws a connection between the two parties. Both of them are released. Their spouses have departed either through death or willful desertion. Here the NRC cautions that if a spouse departs but remains alive, that it is up to the conscience of the innocent party and church confirmation regarding how long to pursue reconciliation and/or remarriage.[@degier_marriage_1984, 4-5]

The big takeway is that this view supports the exception of adultery due to Christ's words, and the exception of abandonment due to Paul's apostolic counsel. In both cases, the innocent party is not so much pursuing a break in the marriage as much as recognizing one that has already occurred. Their spouse has broken their covenant faithfulness by leaving: sexually or physically.

## Scriptural Defense of Adultery & Abandonment View

I believe that the most accurate Scriptural view is the one that allows for divorce in the cases of adultery and abandonment. It is important to reiterate that divorce grieves the heart of God and is not in any way what God desires. Nowhere in the Bible is divorce commanded by God, only permitted. For those who seek reconciliation, there is no chastisement by God that they are to refrain from doing so. They are demonstrating the grace of God in pursuing reconciliation with their spouse. However, they are also permitted these exceptions.

In order to make our Scriptural defense we need to enter into the context of Jesus' debate with the Pharisees. In Matthew and Mark, Jesus is addressing their views from the school of Hillel and Shammai. Hillel was a very liberal Rabbi that taught that divorce was allowed for even trivial reasons if the man saw some sort of unfitness in his wife (even something such as not being satisfied with her cooking). This unfitness is based on the interpretation of *erwat debar* "not find favor" in Deut 24:1-4.[@walston_divorce_1991, 19-21] In contrast, Shammai was more strict about what was allowed as grounds for divorce. Jesus tightens the restriction, but referring to Deut 24 and then referring back to Genesis. He states that this was not the intent of God but rather goes back to basics and establishes God's intent that the covenant of marriage is lasting. This is likely the source of the shock of the disciples. He is more strict than even Shammai was.

We will now go through and list some Scriptural critiques of the permanence view that strengthen our case. Firstly, we must disagree with their interpretation of *porneia*. Jesus, in His reference to Genesis, is clearly not referring to betrothed couples. He is referring to marriage. The alternate word for adultery (*moicheia*) is not used be Christ because he wishes to make an expansive category of sexual sin that covers all sexual deviancy before and after marriage. If Jesus did not use *porneia* then pornography, bestiality, homosexuality, polygamy etc would have gone unaddressed by Christ.[@walston_divorce_1991, 13-14] He is deliberate in referring to many types of deviancy. It is also unfounded by permanence advocates to point to "fornication" as exclusively referring to engaged couples. Jay Adams gives seven reasons in his volume as to why the engagement theory is unsustainable.[@adams_marriage_1986, 55-56] During the time of King James translation, the word was not restricted to pre-marital sex. It is only in our modern use of the word that we have restricted its use. Thus both in Greek and English there is no foundation for this claim that *porneia* excludes marital sexual unfaithfulness.

Our second critique is against the permanence view that Paul's counsel does not introduce and exception. Advocates hold that Paul states "I, not the Lord" when referring to his counsel to let the reader know that it is his opinion to allow for divorce in the case of abandonment. However, this is not an honest hermeneutic of Scripture. If we believe that God's Word is inspired, then Paul's apostolic counsel is valid. He is not to be disregarded simply because he is not Christ. The reason Paul says "I, not the Lord" is because he is informing the reader that this is something new he is giving, which has no precedent in the Gospels.[@walston_divorce_1991, 23] He is not saying that his words are to be dismissed!

Lastly, we would like to show that the outcomes of holding a permanence view are inconsistent with Scripture. The permanence view leads to *minimizing adultery*. Rick Walston aptly states, "The end result of this view is the unscriptural position that the guilty party goes free while the innocent party remains indefinitely in the position of suffering" (Numbers 5:12-31)[@walston_divorce_1991, 11-12] Indeed, holding that their is no exception for adultery is binding the innocent person to a lifetime of suffering unfaithfulness with no recurse. In effect, they are stuck in the marriage until their spouse dies and there is no true incentive for the guilty party to ever change. Now if Scripture truly advocated for a permanence view then those who believe in the inerrancy of God's Word would accept this result. But is that what Scripture says? Of course not, this is why Christ introduces adultery as an exception. To force someone to remain married to a serial adulterer is to bind their conscience where God has not and it is to punish the innocent for the crimes of the guilty, which is something God sharply condemns.

Lastly, the permanence view holds to a skewed understanding of "covenant". It seems to take for granted that covenants are always unbreakable, no matter the circumstance.[@wenham_remarriage_2006, 61] This is erroneous because when Scripture talks about covenants, it frequently discusses the topic of them being breached or broken. God's covenant with Israel even included blessings and cursings as part of the covenant. God directly addresses the break of the Old Covenant in His discussion with the New Covenant with Israel (Jeremiah 31:32, Hebrews 8:9). The marriage covenant can be broken, and this is precisely what Christ and Paul are addressing in the two exceptions. In both of them, the believer is not breaking the covenant but recognizing that it has been broken by the offending party.

## Conclude by showing argument has answered the original question (<1 page)

In many ways this is a New Covenant debate, because the penalty for adultery in the Old Covenant was death by stoning. In that case, the permission for remarriage was clear-cut! We have sought to establish that the believers in the modern day are still allowed a freedom to remarry for the two exceptions listed above. These are the only two exceptions because they are the only two given by Christ and by Paul. We have proven that the uses of *porneia* and "letting go" are intended to give believers permission to recognize that the covenant in their marriage has been broken and they are free to move on "as if the offending party were dead" (Westminster Confession 24.5). The hardline view of "Til death do us part" has an orthodox ring to it until we realize that this view fails to take the exceptions of Scripture into account and imprisons tender consciences. To bind where the Word has not is just as much an error as to give liberty where Scripture does not.

Where do we go from here? How do we resolve serious martial conflict? There are a few principles which can guide us:

1. We must reiterate that divorce is not *mandated* by Scripture. If the innocent party holds out hope of reconciliation, they are not dissuaded from doing so.
2. We are given church discipline to aid us.[@adams_marriage_1986, 57-59] Matthew 18 was given to us for dispute resolution amongst Christians - including in marriage conflict. It is through following this process that we either get reconciliation or a broken marriage is recognized as such and the innocent party is given sanction to remarry in peace and with a clear conscience.
3. We must remember Christ's love for His church, which surpasses ours in every way. Psalm 106 gives us a vivid picture of the many repeated ways in which Israel broke their covenant with God, and yet His love remained. God gives such abundant mercy in giving us allowances in marriage which He did not take Himself in His love for His church. God truly has not held back in His mercy to us!